Up to this point, we've
generally talked about
a policy as something
that is given.
The policy specifies
how an agent behaves.
Given this way of behaving,
we then aim to find
the value function.
But the goal of
reinforcement learning is not
just to evaluate
specific policies.
Ultimately, we want
to find a policy that
obtains as much reward as
possible in the long run.
In this video, we
will make this notion
precise with the idea
of an optimal policy.
By the end of this video,
you will be able to
define an optimal policy,
understand how policy
can be at least
as good as every other policy
in every state,
and identify an optimal
policy for a given MDP.
To define an optimal policy,
we first have to
understand what it means
for one policy to be
better than another.
Here we can see the value of
two policies plotted
across states.
Note that we plot it as
a continuous line for
illustration only.
We are still considering
discrete states,
and the value might not very
smoothly across states.
This plot illustrates
that in some states,
Pi one achieves a higher value,
and in other states Pi two
achieves a higher value.
So it does not make
much sense to say
Pi one is better than Pi two,
or that Pi two is
better than Pi one.
We will say policy Pi one is
as good as or better
than policy Pi two,
if and only if the
value under Pi one is
greater than or
equal to the value
under Pi two for every state.
We denote this
relationship between
policies with a greater
than or equal to sign.
In the diagram shown here,
the line visualizing
the value of Pi one
is always above
the line for Pi two.
So in this case,
Pi one is as good as
or better than Pi two.
An optimal policy, is
a policy which is as
good as or better than
all the other policies.
That is, an optimal
policy will have
the highest possible
value in every state.
There's always
at least one optimal policy,
but there may be more than one.
We'll use the notation Pi star
to denote any optimal policy.
It might not be clear why there
must exist optimal policies.
That is, policies that
are at least as good
as all other policies
and every state.
Couldn't we have a situation
we're doing well in
one state requires doing
badly and another.
Let's say there is
such a policy Pi one,
which does well in some states
while policy Pi two,
does well and others.
We could combine
these policies into
a third policy Pi three,
which always chooses actions
according to whichever of
policy Pi one and
Pi two has the highest
value in the current state.
Pi three will necessarily
have a value greater than or
equal to both Pi one and
Pi two in every state.
So we will never have
a situation we're doing well
in one state require
sacrificing value in another.
Because of this,
there always exists
some policy which is
best in every state.
This is of course
only an informal argument,
but there's in fact
a rigorous proof
showing that there must
always exist at least one
optimal deterministic policy.
Notice, that in
some states Pi three has
a strictly greater value than
either Pi one or Pi two.
As an exercise, try to
explain how this is
possible given that
Pi three simply chooses actions
according to whichever of
Pi one and Pi two has
a higher value in each state.
Let's look at
a specific example to
build some intuition
about optimal policies.
Consider the two
choice MDP shown here.
The only decision
to be made is in
the top state labeled X.
The agent can take
either action A1 or A2.
From state X, action A1,
takes the agent to state Y.
In state Y, only action A1 is
available and it takes
the agent back to state X.
On the other hand action A2 and
X takes the agent to state Z.
From state Z action A1 is again
the only action available
and it takes the agent
back to state X.
The numbers show the rewards
the agent receives
after each action.
Notice that while A1 offers
an immediate reward of plus one,
A2 offers a larger reward of
plus two after single-step delay.
There are only two deterministic
policies in this MDP
which are completely defined by
the agents choice in state X.
Take action A1 or take action A2.
Let's call these
Pi one and Pi two.
Which of these two
policies is optimal?
The optimal policy
what will be the one
for which the value
of X is highest.
The answer depends on
the discount factor Gamma.
Consider Gamma equals zero.
In this case, the value is
defined using
only the immediate reward.
The value of state X
under Pi one is plus one,
while the value under
Pi two is zero because
the plus to reward occurs
after a one-step delay,
which does not affect
the return when Gamma
is set to zero.
So in this case, Pi one
is the optimal policy.
What if instead Gamma equals 0.9?
In this case, the value of X
under each policy
is an infinite sum.
Pi one receives
an immediate reward
of one followed by zero,
and then one again, and so on.
Each reward and the expression
for the value of
state X is discounted
by some power of Gamma.
We can express this compactly
as a geometric series.
Applying the geometric
series formula,
we get the value shown here for
Pi one which evaluates
to around 5.3.
We can write the
value under Pi two.
Similarly, except we
will receive a reward of
two on every odd step instead
of one on every even step.
We can again write this as
a geometric series and obtain
a closed form solution.
In this case, the solution
evaluates to around 9.5.
Since 9.5 is higher than 5.3,
Pi two is optimal in this case.
In these two choice MDP,
finding the optimal policy
was relatively straightforward.
There were only two
deterministic policies,
and we simply had to compute
the value function
for each of them.
In general, it will
not be so easy.
Even if we limit ourselves
to deterministic policies,
the number of possible policies
is equal to the number of
possible actions to the power
of the number of states.
We could use a brute force
search where we compute
the value function for
every policy to find
the optimal policy.
But it's not hard to
see this will become
intractable for
even moderately large MDPs.
Luckily, there's a better way to
organize our search
of the policy space.
The solution will
come in the form of
yet another set of
Bellman equations,
called the Bellman's
Optimality equations,
which we will introduce
in an upcoming video.
That's it for this video.
The most important things to take
away are an optimal policy
is defined as the policy with
the highest value in all states.
At least one optimal policy
always exists but there
may be more than one.
The exponential number
of possible policies,
makes searching for
the optimal policy
by brute force intractable.